Introduce a high-level document of Pirouette's design (#184)
tweag/pirouette: DESIGN.md

find all the heavy work in [`Language.Pirouette.Example`].

The example language also has a concrete syntax heavily inspired by Haskell.
Thanks to quasi-quoters, it is easy to define a set of unordered value
definitions for the `Ex`ample language:

```haskell
myProgram :: PrtUnorderedDefs Ex
myProgram = [prog|
  addone : Integer -> Integer
  addone x = x + 1

  addtwo : Integer -> Integer
  addtwo x = x + 2
|]
```

Now for a more involved example. Say we want to compute a sum of integers in a
generic way. We can do that by writing a function `sum` taking a list of
integers and returning the total. In order to do that, we first need a notion of
lists, which we choose to do in a generic way. Here we go:

```haskell
data List a
  = Nil : List a
  | Cons : a -> List a -> List a
```

Computing the sum of the elements of a list requires traversing it, which we can
also decide to do in a generic way with a fold over the list.

```haskell
foldr : forall a r . (a -> r -> r) -> r -> List a -> r
foldr @a @r f e l =
  match_List @a l @r
    e
    (\(x : a) (xs : List a) . f x (foldr @a @r f e xs))
```

Note how quantification in types has to be explicit, and the definition of the

> datatype `List` also creates the corresponding `match_List` function taking, in

Reviewer: Maybe a reference about this style of doing case analysis would be helpful.

Author: Anything particular in mind or should we look for something?

whether the user's statements/questions actually hold.

Pirouette relies on [smtlib-backend] for the communication with its SMT prover
of choice, [Z3]. There are still a bunch of modules in Pirouette making the
interface between the rest of the engine and [smtlib-backends], mainly to
convert assumptions/constraints to the [SMT-LIB] language. These modules live in
[`Pirouette.SMT`].

[z3]: https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3
[smtlib-backends]: https://github.com/tweag/smtlib-backends
[smt-lib]: https://smtlib.cs.uiowa.edu/

### Symbolic Evaluator

[symbolic evaluator]: #symbolic-evaluator

#### The symbolic evaluation monad — `SymEval`

The heart of Pirouette's symbolic engine lives in [`Pirouette.Symbolic.Eval`].
This module defines the `SymEval` monad providing all the tooling to make
symbolic evaluation work. Here is the monad in question:

```haskell
newtype SymEval lang a = SymEval
  { symEval ::
      ReaderT
        (SymEvalEnv lang)
        (StateT (SymEvalSt lang) WeightedList)
        a
  }
```

Morally speaking, though, and forgetting the `lang` type parameters, this monad
simply represent functions of type:

```haskell
SymEvalEnv -> SymEvalSt -> [(a, SymEvalSt)]
```

> taking an environment and a state and returning a list of states, as well as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
taking an environment and a [state](#the-symbolic-evaluation-state--symevalst) and returning a list of states, as well as
```

pattern matching, and therefore it would return two pairs `Term, SymEvalSt`:

1. In the first pair, the `Term` would be `e` itself and the state would be
   updated to account for the fact that we now know that `l = Nil`.
2. In the second pair, the `Term` would be `f x (foldr f e xs)` and the state
   would be updated to account for the fact the we now have two more variables,
   `x` and `xs`, that are an integer and a list of integers respectively, and an
   additional constraint, `l = Cons x xs`.

The whole symbolic execution consists in running this one step over and over
again until it is not possible to reduce the terms anymore. In the example
above, our first term/state is now blocked because there isn't much one can do
with an integer. The second term/state is not blocked because one can replace
`f` by its definition and continue unfolding from there.

#### The symbolic evaluation state — `SymEvalSt`

Defined in [`Pirouette.Symbolic.Eval.Types`], the symbolic state basically
contains the following:

1. A context of variables, that is a map from variable names to their types.
   This context is typically called Γ in literature, and `gamma` in the code.

> 2. A set of constraints linking variables together, for instance `l == Cons x
>    xs`, `k != Nil` or `x = 7`. It is in fact not a set, but a complex

Author: Nope; I just tend to use `=` all the time with OCaml, so if I'm not careful I fall back to that.
```suggestion
2. A set of constraints linking variables together, for instance `l == Cons x
   xs`, `k != Nil` or `x == 7`. It is in fact not a set, but a complex
```

>    xs`, `k != Nil` or `x = 7`. It is in fact not a set, but a complex
>    union-find-based type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   xs`, `k != Nil` or `x = 7`. It is implemented with a union-find-based type.
```
A reference about `union-find` could be helpful here.

Author: Do you have an idea of a good reference for this?

In term of academic references, apparently, the first reference could be [(Galler & Fisher 64)](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/364099.364331) but I don't think I've ever read it. I have read stuff by Ullman, probably in a book of his, which might make it more readable. I'll try to find that. I have also read [(Tarjan & van Leeuwen 84)](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/62.2160) and that's I think the implementation that is used nowadays; it's been proven later that it was optimal.

But maybe you just meant a reference to an overview of Union-Find data structures? A wikipedia page, for instance?

Reviewer: > But maybe you just meant a reference to an overview of Union-Find data structures? A wikipedia page, for instance?

This might do.

Author: Done in d7c953e.

> 3. Statistics on the execution, for instance the number of unfoldings that took

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Statistics on the execution, for instance the number of case analyses that took
```
?

   place. Despite the name, those statistics can have an important impact on the
   behaviour of the engine because they are observed to decide whether to stop
   the execution or not.

as well as some extra fields necessary for administrative reasons. Those field
names are prefixed by `sest` in the code.

#### The symbolic evaluation environment — `SymEvalEnv`

Defined in [`Pirouette.Symbolic.Eval`], the symbolic environment contains the
following:

> 1. A set of unordered definitions in which to evaluate the term. For instance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. An environment of unordered definitions in which to evaluate the term. For instance,
```

> 1. A set of unordered definitions in which to evaluate the term. For instance,

Reviewer: Has it been explained already what an "unordered definition" is?

Author: I realise now how bad my formulation was. I tried to fix this in 29e4cd5.

> 1. A set of unordered definitions in which to evaluate the term. For instance,

Reviewer: How is this conceptually different from the constraints that link variables to variables and values in `SymEvalSt`?

Author: I don't think it is conceptually different. Constraints are more expressive, and I think we could easily encode the set of definitions into constraints. I even think that's what we must do to send the set of definitions to the solver, but I am unsure of this, and there might be performance considerations at play here. It might be worth investigating, though, because that could potentially lead to a simplification of the code. What do you want to do with this for the design document?

Reviewer: I would put a note in the documentation to say as much. It is fair to defer diving further into the matter.

Author: Done in fbe4e22.

Author: And I opened https://github.com/tweag/pirouette/issues/188.

   if your term is `foldr @Integer @Integer (\(x : Integer) (y : Integer) . x +
   y) 0 l`, then `foldr` and `l` have to come from somewhere, and it will
   probably be the example language's standard library augmented with the
   definition of the list of integers `l`, and that would be the set of
   definitions in the environment.

2. Two “solvers” that are functions taking a problem and trying to solve it. The
   one of interest to us in the symbolic evaluation is `solvePathProblem ::

>    CheckPathProblem lang -> Bool` which takes a “path problem” describing the

Author: I tried describing this more in e81df98.

result means that we will always consider `λxs. A(B(xs), xs)` and `λxs. C(B(xs),
xs)`. Assuming the body is of type `αs -> ρ`, then the antecedent and consequent
should be of type `ρ -> αs -> Bool`, that is they should be considered as two
predicates on the body's result and arguments. The prover attempts to check two
properties on the three terms `A`, `B` and `C`:

- First, the prover attempts to check whether the antecedent is consistent, that
  is whether there exists `xs` such that `A(B(xs), xs)` holds.

- Second, the prover attempts to check whether the antecedent implies the
  consequent, that is whether for all `xs`, `A(B(xs), xs) ⇒ C(B(xs), xs)`.

Concretely, `proveRaw` takes a `Problem`, does all the administrative work of
extracting the `xs` from the body, creating corresponding symbolic variables,
preparing the terms, and then calls `worker`, where all the actual work happens.

`worker` takes the three aforementioned terms as input and evaluates them all by
one step. We refer the reader to [`symEvalOneStep`] for what this means
precisely. If any of the three terms is stuck, that is if no more reductions are possible,

> then `worker` attempts to see if the properties above holds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then `worker` attempts to see if the properties above hold.
```

Pirouette's Design
==================

> This document aims at giving an overview of the crucial parts of Pirouette, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document gives an overview of Pirouette, and
```

pointers to get familiar with the code. As such, it contains three parts.

> 1. The [first part][languages] describe how Pirouette supports several input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The [first part][languages] describes how Pirouette supports several input
```

   languages as well as two languages that are particularly relevant to us: [the
   example language] and the support for Plutus IR – [Plutus intermediate
   representation].

2. The [second part][transformations] describes the transformations that
   Pirouette performs on the input language to get it in a shape ready for
   symbolic execution.

3. The [third part][symbolic engine] digs into what constitutes the heart of
   Pirouette: its symbolic engine, and in particular the [symbolic evaluator]
   and the [symbolic prover].

Languages
---------

[languages]: #languages

### Pirouette's genericity

> Pirouette attempts to be generic in the input language by only assuming that it
> is System F-like. Anyone can then come and define their instance of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pirouette can process any System F-like languages.
More precisely, users can come and define their instance of
```

> `LanguageBuiltins`, which is Pirouette's way of defining the constants, builtin

Author: I think it would deserve further documentation because it did not strike me as easy to figure out, no. However, I haven't made the effort to figure it out and I am not sure what I could add to the document with my current knowledge. Maybe we simply open an issue stating that we want more details about this?

> `LanguageBuiltins`, which is Pirouette's way of defining the constants, builtin

Reviewer: Opening an issue works, and maybe leaving a TODO note.

> `LanguageBuiltins`, which is Pirouette's way of defining the constants, builtin

Author: cf https://github.com/tweag/pirouette/issues/189.

terms and builtin types of a language. The definition of the classes can be

> found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`]. For a simple, concrete instantiation of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`]. For a simple instantiation of
```

Reviewer 2: What would be a non-concrete instantiation?

Author: This question makes me realise how misleading that word can be. I just meant something we could look at in the current repository. I'll take your suggestion to remove the word altogether.

> found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`]. For a simple, concrete instantiation of

Author: I indeed do not explain this and was hoping to get away with it. However, you are right, this might be the place to describe this. WDYT?

> found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`]. For a simple, concrete instantiation of

Reviewer: If you know about it already, some comments could be helpful. Otherwise, this is some other issue to open and TODO note to add.

> found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`]. For a simple, concrete instantiation of

Author: cf https://github.com/tweag/pirouette/issues/190.

a language, you might want to check [the example language]. For a more involved
one, you might want to check [the support for Plutus IR][plutus intermediate
representation].

### The example language

[the example language]: #the-example-language

The example language is the only instance of a language included in Pirouette.
It is a simple functional language supporting higher-order types with explicit
type annotations, basic types (booleans, integers, strings) with their

> associated operators, algebraic datatypes and pattern-matching. The definition
> of the language is done by providing the `LanguageBuiltins` instance. You will
> find all the heavy work in [`Language.Pirouette.Example`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
associated operators, algebraic datatypes and pattern-matching. You will
find all the heavy work in [`Language.Pirouette.Example`].
```
It was already mentioned what to define for a new language

The example language also has a concrete syntax heavily inspired by Haskell.
Thanks to quasi-quoters, it is easy to define a set of unordered value
definitions for the `Ex`ample language:

```haskell

> myProgram :: PrtUnorderedDefs Ex

Author: I made an attempt to introduce this type a bit in 0a7f22d. I'm not very happy with how it sounds but at least there is some more content now. WDYT?

myProgram = [prog|
  addone : Integer -> Integer
  addone x = x + 1

  addtwo : Integer -> Integer
  addtwo x = x + 2
|]
```

Now for a more involved example. Say we want to compute a sum of integers in a
generic way. We can do that by writing a function `sum` taking a list of
integers and returning the total. In order to do that, we first need a notion of
lists, which we choose to do in a generic way. Here we go:

```haskell
data List a
  = Nil : List a
  | Cons : a -> List a -> List a
```

Computing the sum of the elements of a list requires traversing it, which we can
also decide to do in a generic way with a fold over the list.

```haskell
foldr : forall a r . (a -> r -> r) -> r -> List a -> r
foldr @a @r f e l =
  match_List @a l @r
    e
    (\(x : a) (xs : List a) . f x (foldr @a @r f e xs))
```

Note how quantification in types has to be explicit, and the definition of the
datatype `List` also creates the corresponding `match_List` function taking, in
that order, the datatype type arguments, an element of that datatype, the
returning type, and as many cases as there are constructors, in the same order.

> 
> The hardest part has been done. It is now simple to define a `sum` function, a
> list of integers – say `1`, `2`, `3` – and apply `sum` over them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is now possible to define a `sum` function, a
list of integers – say `1`, `2`, `3` – and apply `sum` over them.
```

```haskell
sum : List Integer -> Integer
sum =
  foldr
    @Integer
    @Integer
    (\(x : Integer) (y : Integer) . x + y)
    0

myList : List Integer
myList = Cons @Integer 1 (Cons @Integer 2 (Cons @Integer 3 (Nil @Integer)))

myListTotal : Integer
myListTotal = sum myList
```

For more examples, check out the standard library for the example language in
[`Language.Pirouette.Example.StdLib`]. The standard library also comes with a
quasi-quoter of its own allowing you to leverage it in your code should you want
it:

```haskell
myProgram :: PrtUnorderedDefs Ex
myProgram = [progWithStdLib|
  sum : List Integer -> Integer
  sum =
    foldr
      @Integer
      @Integer
      (\(x : Integer) (y : Integer) . x + y)
      0
|]
```

### Plutus Intermediate Representation

[plutus intermediate representation]: #plutus-intermediate-representation

To run Pirouette on Plutus Intermediate Representation scripts, one has to use
the [pirouette-plutusir library].

[pirouette-plutusir library]: https://github.com/tweag/pirouette-plutusir

Transformations
---------------

> [transformations]: #transformations

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to link Georg's blog post for initial info about transformations.

Author: Done in 8541ad8.

Author: Done in 8541ad8.

_This part is empty and should be documented._ Transformations live in
[`Pirouette.Transformations`].

Symbolic Engine
---------------

[symbolic engine]: #symbolic-engine

The symbolic engine is split into three main parts: an SMT prover, as well as
all the administrative work to communicate with it, Pirouette's _[symbolic
evaluator]_, and Pirouette's _[symbolic prover]_. We describe these three
aspects in the following sub-sections.

### SMT prover

As is classic in symbolic engines, Pirouette relies on SMT provers to do the
hard work. These provers are used in two different ways. They help pruning
branches of execution that are actually unreachable, and they help deciding

> whether the user's statement/questions actually hold.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whether the user's statements/questions actually hold.
```

Pirouette relies on [smtlib-backend] for the communication with its SMT prover
of choice, [Z3]. There are still a bunch of modules in Pirouette making the
interface between the rest of the engine and [smtlib-backends], mainly to
convert assumptions/constraints to the [SMT-LIB] language. These modules live in
[`Pirouette.SMT`].

[z3]: https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3
[smtlib-backends]: https://github.com/tweag/smtlib-backends
[smt-lib]: https://smtlib.cs.uiowa.edu/

### Symbolic Evaluator

[symbolic evaluator]: #symbolic-evaluator

#### The symbolic evaluation monad — `SymEval`

The heart of Pirouette's symbolic engine lives in [`Pirouette.Symbolic.Eval`].
This module defines the `SymEval` monad providing all the tooling to make
symbolic evaluation work. Here is the monad in question:

```haskell
newtype SymEval lang a = SymEval
  { symEval ::
      ReaderT
        (SymEvalEnv lang)
        (StateT (SymEvalSt lang) WeightedList)
        a
  }
```

Morally speaking, though, and forgetting the `lang` type parameters, this monad
simply represent functions of type:

```haskell
SymEvalEnv -> SymEvalSt -> [(a, SymEvalSt)]
```

> taking an environment and a state and returning a list of state, as well as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
taking an environment and a state and returning a list of states, as well as
```

potential return values. It returns a list because symbolic evaluation may

> branch and explore different paths.

Author: I ignore the `WeightedList`s indeed, but mostly because I can't really explain why they're there. I have a few vague ideas, but nothing clear enough to make it into this document. My impression is that a list would be fine and that `WeightedList`s are a case of early and over- engineering, but that makes me think that I missed something. For now, I added da71ec1 that says explicitly that we assume that they are lists. I'll open an issue to track this missing point.

  SymEvalConstr lang =>
  TermMeta lang SymVar ->
  WriterT Any (SymEval lang) (TermMeta lang SymVar)
```

Once again, morally speaking, forgetting the `lang` type parameters and
replacing `TermMeta lang SymVar` by just `Term`, this function has type `Term ->
SymEval Term`. One can then think of this as a function of type:

```haskell
SymEvalEnv -> (Term, SymEvalSt) -> [(Term, SymEvalSt)]
```

Such a function takes a term in the input language and a symbolic evaluation
state. It tries to apply one step of beta-reduction to the term, which may yield
zero, one or several potential terms and updated states.

For an example, let us assume that our input term is the body of the `foldr`
function in [the example language], specialised for lists of `Integer`s (for
readability, we remove the type applications).

```haskell
match_List l
  e
  (\(x : Integer) (xs : List Integer) . f x (foldr f e xs))
```

and that our state specifies that:

- `e` is an integer, without giving its value,
- `f` is the function `\(x : Integer) (y : Integer) . x + y`, and
- `l` is a list of integers, without giving its value.

One step of the symbolic engine would then have to explore both branches of the

> pattern matching, and therefore it would return two pairs `Term, SymEvalSt`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pattern matching, and therefore it would return two pairs `(Term, SymEvalSt)`:
```

1. In the first pair, the `Term` would be `e` itself and the state would be
   updated to account for the fact that we now know that `l = Nil`.
2. In the second pair, the `Term` would be `f x (foldr f e xs)` and the state
   would be updated to account for the fact the we now have two more variables,
   `x` and `xs`, that are an integer and a list of integers respectively, and an
   additional constraint, `l = Cons x xs`.

> The whole symbolic execution consists in running this one step over and over

Reviewer 2: does it run it in depth or in width ?

Author: Technically, you can do whatever you want, but the way Pirouette is currently written goes in width, and the way the `SymEval` monad is written really encourages you to do in width.

Author: Covered in d572d5a.

> again until it is not possible to reduce the terms anymore. In the example

Author: Actually, no! The threshold is not enforced at the level of the symbolic evaluator but at the level of the the symbolic prover. It is definitely worth mentioning in one way or another so I will think about this.

> again until it is not possible to reduce the terms anymore. In the example

Author: Alright, I gave it a try in 4e405c4.

above, our first term/state is now blocked because there isn't much one can do

> with an integer. The second term/state is not blocked because one can replace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with an integer, when considered built-ins. The second term/state is not blocked because one can replace
```

Author: I don't understand this suggestion.

   logical formulas that have to hold for this path to be reachable and answers
   whether or not it is.

3. Options influencing the behaviour of the symbolic execution. Those control
   for instance the size of the pool of SMT solvers that Pirouette uses in the
   background. More importantly, the options contain a function `shouldStop ::
   StoppingCondition`, where `StoppingCondition` is a type alias for
   `SymEvalStatistics -> Bool`. This function inspects the statistics in the
   symbolic evaluation state and decides whether the symbolic evaluation should
   stop. This is a generalisation of the usual notion of “fuel”. Two trivial
   instances would be `\_ -> false` that never stops and `\stat ->
   sestConstructors stat > 50` that stops after 50 constructors unfoldings.

Those field names are prefixed by `see` in the code.

### Symbolic Prover

[symbolic prover]: #symbolic-prover

The symbolic prover is a wrapper around the [symbolic evaluator]. One can see
the symbolic evaluator as the library providing the generic tooling for symbolic
evaluation, which the symbolic prover uses to answer requests about Hoare

> triples.

Author: Actually, no! And to be honest it's both simpler than Hoare logic but also a bit more general (which allows later an encoding of incorrectness logic). At this point, though, it looks very much like Hoare logic.

> triples.

Author: I tried to explain this much more by adding a first subsection of this “Symbolic Prover” section that explains our variant of Hoare logic. This takes the content of the first paragraph of the next subsection, rehashes it and adds a lot of details, namely how they come from Hoare logic and how they link to incorrectness logic and to, maybe, outcome logic. See b7a7086.

#### The key functions — `proveRaw` and `worker`

Defined in [`Pirouette.Symbolic.Prover`], the `proveRaw` and `worker` function
are the main part of the symbolic prover. Morally speaking, these functions take
as input a triple of terms, called the _antecedent_, the _body_ and the
_consequent_, of shapes `λr,xs. A(r,xs)`, `λxs. B(xs)` and `λr,xs. C(r,xs)`
respectively, where `r` is a symbolic argument for the _result_ and `xs` is a
list of symbolic arguments common to all three terms. The idea that `r` is the
result means that we will always consider `λxs. A(B(xs), xs)` and `λxs. C(B(xs),
xs)`. Assuming the body is of type `αs -> ρ`, then the antecedent and consequent
should be of type `ρ -> αs -> Bool`, that is they should be considered as two
predicates on the body's result and arguments. The prover attempts to check two
properties on the three terms `A`, `B` and `C`:

- First, the prover attempts to check whether the antecedent is consistent, that
  is whether there exists `xs` such that `A(B(xs), xs)` holds.

- Second, the prover attempts to check whether the antecedent implies the
  consequent, that is whether for all `xs`, `A(B(xs), xs) ⇒ C(B(xs), xs)`.

> Concretely, `proveRaw` takes a `Problem` and does all the administrative work of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Concretely, `proveRaw` takes a `Problem`, does all the administrative work of
```

extracting the `xs` from the body, creating corresponding symbolic variables,
preparing the terms, and then calls `worker`, where all the actual work happens.

`worker` takes the three aforementioned terms as input and evaluates them all by
one step. We refer the reader to [`symEvalOneStep`] for what this means

> precisely. If any of the three terms is stuck, that is if it is not possible to
> evaluate them more, then `worker` attempts to see if the properties above holds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
precisely. If any of the three terms is stuck, that is if no more reductions are possible,
then `worker` attempts to see if the properties above holds.
```

Pirouette's Design
==================

This document gives an overview of Pirouette, and
pointers to get familiar with the code. As such, it contains three parts.

1. The [first part][languages] describes how Pirouette supports several input
   languages as well as two languages that are particularly relevant to us: [the
   example language] and Plutus IR – [Plutus intermediate
   representation].

2. The [second part][transformations] describes the transformations that
   Pirouette performs on the input language to get it in a shape ready for
   symbolic execution.

3. The [third part][symbolic engine] digs into what constitutes the heart of
   Pirouette: its symbolic engine, and in particular the [symbolic evaluator]
   and the [symbolic prover].

Languages
---------

[languages]: #languages

### Pirouette's genericity

Pirouette can process any System F-like language. More precisely, users can come
and define their instance of `LanguageBuiltins`, which is Pirouette's way of
defining the constants, builtin terms and builtin types of a language. The
definition of the classes can be found in [`Pirouette.Term.Syntax.Base`].

> Unless preprocessed in a way or another, Pirouette languages feature explicit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pirouette languages feature explicit
```

type anotations, no namespacing and the definitions of terms are considered to

> be all mutually recursive. In fact, almost all of Pirouette works on the type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be all mutually recursive. More precisely, Pirouette works on the type
```

Transformations
---------------

[transformations]: #transformations

_Warning: This section has been written by a non-expert based on information
gathered here and there. There might be missing, outdated, irrelevant or even
wrong information. We believe it should still give a good starting point to
anyone willing to understand Pirouette's transformations._

A transformation in Pirouette goes from internal representation to internal
representation. In general, transformations aim at simplifying the input term by
getting rid of some features, while keeping the semantics unchanged.

In a typical setting, an input term will go through several transformations
before reaching its final form that can be symbolically evaluated. In
particular, some transformations assume that they take place after another one;
additionally, transformations should preserve the invariant of previous
transformations. The dependencies between transformations are formalised in
Haskell's type system; we refer the reader to the upcoming Tweag blog post
“Type-safe data processing pipelines” for more information on this.

Transformations live in [`Pirouette.Transformations`].

### Conversion to prenex normal form

> This transformation puts signatures into some kind of a normal form where type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This transformation puts signatures into a normal form where type
```

When this transformation sees a destructor that is applied to more arguments than
there are branches (and the scrutinee), it moves the extra argument inside the
branches. Indeed, if this is the case, then the branches really return a
function, and the extra (aka excessive) arguments are really arguments to this
returned function. As an example, consider (with type applications omitted):

```haskell
match_Nat n
  (\b -> if b then 0 else 1)
  (\n b -> if b then n else 0)
  True
```

`match_Nat` takes the scrutinee and two branches, yet it has three parameters. So,
what this transformation does is pushing True inside branches, yielding:

```haskell
match_Nat n
  (if True then 0 else 1)
  (\n -> if True then n else 0)
```

### Monomorphisation

Monomorphisation removes polymorphism, which we need out of the way both for
some other transformations to be possible and to make the work of SMT solvers
easier. It is straightforward except for recursive aspects. For instance, it
transforms

```haskell
map (+ 1) [1, 2, 3]
```

into

```haskell
mapInt (+ 1) [1, 2, 3]
```

where `mapInt` only works with `Int`s.

It is not obvious whether the current algorithm terminates on arbitrary System F

> programs, but it does in practice. The monomorphisation needs also to happen for
> constructors and destructors and types, that is it needs to happen for anything
> polymorphic.
> 

Author: I like the suggestion but it seems to contradict what was said previously, so I will go for:
```suggestion
programs, but it does in practice. Monomorphisation happens for anything polymorphic,
that is functions, but also constructors and destructors and types.

```

We originally considered monomorphising only high-order functions, because SMT
solvers can usually work with first-order polymorphic functions; it is however
simpler to monomorphise everything.

### Eta expansion

Eta-expansion turns partially applied functions to fully applied ones under a
λ-abstraction. For instance, `map f` would become `λ xs. map f xs`. This
transformation is most useful to prepare for defunctionalisation. It is also a
straightforward transformation, although there has some technical details to
handle; for instance if there are functions as arguments.

### Defunctionalisation

> This transformation removes all higher-order functions and replace them with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This transformation removes all higher-order functions and replaces them with
```
